ABOUT THIS EDITION

It is only when the people know the true behavior of a government that they can meaningfully choose to support or oppose that behavior. And so, there can be no true democracy without open government and a free press.  Historically, a free press has only existed where publication and revelation, even anonymously, are protected and not controlled by those within government. But even in governments that supposedly offer such protections, those protections are often withdrawn under political pressure.
The non-fiction book Smith County Justice was written as an exposé of governmental corruption in the East Texas town of Tyler, the county seat of Smith County. Its publication sent shock waves through the political machine of  the city of Tyler which then devised a plan for damage control. Shortly after its publication great pressure was brought upon the publisher to remove the book from circulation. All unsold copies in bookstores were ordered returned to the publisher and burned. Just exactly what threats were made against the publisher has been a subject of much speculation but there have been numerous examples of those who crossed the power elite in Tyler going to prison on trumped-up charges, being shot by the police, or in some cases simply disappearing (a few examples are given in the book). Considering the fact that Smith County courts can issue arrest warrants and request extraditions, it becomes apparent that even being out of state could not protect a publisher or author from trumped up charges in a vindictive legal system bent on revenge.
So where is the book today? It is still being suppressed. For example, the book is not available in the libraries of the very city where it would be expected to be of the most interest. Both the Tyler Public Library and the Tyler Junior College Academic Library have pulled the book from their shelves.
The guilty authorities in Smith County have never acknowledged the evil of their ways or expressed remorse for the lives they ruined. Instead, legal and public relations firms have been engaged to mount a campaign to watch the used book markets for any used copies that might appear. Whenever such copies are found  they are usually bought at whatever price is required and destroyed. As a result, used copies today have become rare and expensive.  Eventually, almost all original printed editions can be expected to disappear.
But now there's another problem for the city of Tyler: The Internet. Again, law firms have been employed in a whitewashing effort whereby they troll on-line sources and attempt to eliminate references to the book. They have been especially vigilant in policing Wikipedia articles about Tyler and Smith County where they usually delete references to the book in a matter of hours (or even minutes in some cases). 
And that's where this electronic edition, published outside the US, comes into play. 
It is our hope that this electronic edition will continue to live on despite the efforts of certain corrupt individuals in Tyler and Smith County who want to eradicate it. The good citizens of Tyler and Smith County can help to cleanse their consciences of the sins committed in their name by actively distributing copies of this electronic edition of the book. The many victims of the Smith County Justice System deserve your help and remembrance.


Spread the word. 
Spread the book. 
Good citizenship requires it.




Copyright Issues

This electronic edition has been published outside the US. However, since we expect it to be of interest to persons in the US, we present the following information.

We believe that it is legal to copy and distribute this book in the US under “fair use” considering the following factors:

1.It is a factual, not fictional work. Facts themselves cannot be copyrighted and so factual works receive less copyright protection than fanciful works.  US courts have ruled, for example, that telephone books cannot be copyrighted because they are primarily factual in nature.
2.The publisher and author no longer offer a version for sale, and so this edition does not act as a substitute for purchasing a paper copy from them. They suffer no financial harm.
3.The original printed edition contained no copyright notice. Although such notice is not absolutely required under US law, it's absence greatly reduces copyright protection.
4.The purpose and character of this edition is noncommercial and for nonprofit educational use.

But remember, even if it is legal to copy this book under US law, the legal system can still be used by those with the power to wield it to exact revenge upon those doing so. Many of the authorities responsible for the things described in this book are alive and well in Tyler and Smith County today and would gladly give a repeat performance if given the chance. Just because you are innocent, does not mean you can't be sued or taken to jail anyway (as described in this book). Anyone distributing this book should be discreet and careful to protect themselves from such retribution.

And of course, if you live in another country you should follow your own local laws.

