---------- Forwarded message ----------
From: Jonathan Katan <jk@mslaw.tc>
Date: Sun, Jul 19, 2009 at 1:XX AM
Subject: Injunction Order relating to Commision of Inquiry Report - Mario
Hoffmann
To: XXXX@XXX.XXX


 Dear Sirs,





In light of the revelation that the redacted parts of the Redacted Report
published today can be accessed we, on behalf of Mario Hoffmann, have
obtained an injunction restraining publication of any part of the redacted
report pending further order of the court.  The court will reconsider the
matter at 10am on Monday the 20th of July and you may attend then to make
any representations you wish.



Please find attached.



1.            Originating Summons

2.            Affidavit in support

3.            *INJUNCTION ORDER*

4.            Summons in relation to hearing on Monday 20th July 2009.





* Jonathan Katan*

* Attorney at Law*

 Miller Simons O'Sullivan

 Beatrice Butterfield Building

 Butterfield Square

P.O. Box 260

Providenciales

Turks and Caicos Islands

Tel: +649 946 4650

Fax: +649 946 4663

Email: jk@mslaw.tc

*Miller Simons O'Sullivan Confidentiality Notice: *

The information contained in this e-mail and any attachment is intended for
the named recipient only.

It may be privileged and confidential. If you are not the intented

recipient, you must not copy, distribute, or otherwise disclose the contents
of this message to any other person. If you have received this e-mail in
error, please notify us immediately by telephone (649) 946 4650 or
e-mail and permanently delete this message and any attachments from your
system.

Exclusion of liability: Miller Simons O'Sullivan has taken every reasonable
precaution to ensure that any attachment to this e-mail has been checked for
viruses. However, we cannot accept liability for any damage sustained as a
result of any such software viruses and advise you to carry out your own
virus check before opening any attachment.

Furthermore, we do not accept responsibility for any change made to this
message after it was sent by the sender.
