Subject: Fw: Membership list?
From:  North East Essex BNP (colchester@bnp.org.uk)  
Sent: 20 November 2008 11:52:56 

Dear Patriot

This is e-mail from Eastern Region
If you have any concerns or queries please feel free to call me on 07902730085
Take care and regards
Jim Taylor

----- Original Message ----- 
From: <easterninfo@bnp.org.uk>
To: <thurrock@bnp.org.uk>
Sent: Thursday, November 20, 2008 4:12 AM
Subject: Membership list  

 Dear All

 The attempt by the enemies of our country to disrupt our growth has 
 failed.

 New members are joining faster than ever as a result of the publicity
 following the publication of our stolen membership list.

 Show the enemy what you think of their pathetic and disgusting attempt to
 intimidate us. Contribute now towards the Eastern Region's European
 Election campaign.

 Send cheques payable to 'British National Party' to P.O. Box 287, Waltham
 Cross, Herts EN8 8ZU.

 The following is a message from Party Chairman Nick Griffin on the
 Membership List Leak.

 A number of members have expressed concern over the 'leak' of an old
 BNP membership list onto several neo-Nazi crank internet forums. The list
 is essentially genuine, but has been slightly modified. Presumably in an
 attempt to cause further mischief, it appears that a number of individuals
 who were not at the time, or who are not and never have been members of
 the party, have been added.

 The vast majority of names and addresses on it are,however, from the
 November 2007 membership and skills list sent to Kenny Smith in his
 capacity at the time as head of admin. This is the same list that was used
 to send via snail mail the bogus British Nationalist members'bulletins
 last December and January.

 Detailed analysis by Tina Wingfield in our membership department proves
 conclusively that the core list dates from between 30th November and 2nd
 December 2007, and that the genuine detailson it are identical to the list
 sent to Smith - as was routinely done - at the end of the month for the
 next month's BN mailing.

 The confused neo-Nazi crank Sharon Ebanks phoned BNP Elections Officer
 Eddy Butler late last night to gloat and to claim that the list first
 surfaced as an anonymous comment on her blog, and was then taken from
 there by 'persons unknown' and put on to a separate blog. The police will
 shortly be investigating the possibility that she was responsible for both
 postings.

 We are certainly not fooled by her pitiful attempts to put the blame on
 John Walker, who she hates on account of his having very properly refused
 to give her BNP money to pay parts of a legal bill that had already been
 paid, and who at no stage in his entire time in the party has ever had
 access to the combined membership/skills list.

 We have already sent formal demands to the web hosts to remove the
 list,pointing out to them that the fact that the publication of this
 year-old list constitutes Contempt of Court because a court order
 preventing its release or use was made and consented to by the group of
 disgraced former employees who first misappropriated it.

 The web hosts' legal departmenthas already acknowledged receipt of our
 detailed analysis and demands. A solicitor has been asked to consider the
 implications of this for the final stages of that legal action, which is
 still not concluded, and we will be taking advice as to what can be done
 by way of enforcement of the Contempt of Court order.

 One good thing here is that even former doubters will now be able to see
 that we were absolutely right to take court action, regardless of the
 potential cost, in order to try to secure our members' right to privacy.

 While we regret that this has now failed, we did at least try, and we have
 since radically changed procedures to avoid a repeat of this problem in
 the future, as well as getting rid of the staff members behind this
 disgraceful act of treachery.

 We have also already made a complaint to Dyfed-Powys Police and will be
 giving formal statements shortly to support our demand for a serious and
 thorough police investigation into a series of very serious potential
 crimes, including breaches of the Data Protection Act, theft and receipt
 of stolen goods, and breaches of the Human Rights Act.

 Unless those involved have been extremely careful to cover their tracks,
 they are liable to find themselves in very serious trouble - and in
 prison.

 Although it is not normally our practice to either confirm or deny whether
 any individual is a member, in the case of any of those whose names have
 apparently been maliciously added to this list suffering any problems as a
 result we will gladly confirm their non-membership status.

 Genuine members who are concerned over possible problems that could arise
 may like to note that even the leftist bigots of the General Teaching
 Council accepted openly at Adam Walker's disciplinary hearing yesterday
 that he had every right to be a teacher and a member of the British
 National Party.

 The fire service has already accepted the same point. While the GTC's use
 of a technical infringement of a rule that Adam hadnever been told about
 is obviously motivated by political malice, the fact remains that police
 officers and prison warders are the only people whose jobs involve a
 specific (and probably illegal) ban on them being members and candidates
 as
 long as they do not bring their politics into the workplace.

 The recent Equality Act makes it clear that discrimination against an
 individual on political grounds constitutes a breach of contractual
 employment law.

 In the highly unlikely event of any individual one of our many thousands
 of members being 'exposed' to their employers and suffering discrimination
 as a result, a substantial compensation pay-out will be on the cards.

 We would recommend very strongly that anyone who believes this might
 become as issue for them joins the independent nationalist trade
 union Solidarity straight away. While leftist unions will turn their backs
 on -or even demand the persecution of - BNP members, Solidarity has
 already built up a great record of fighting and winning cases for its
 members.

 The time when our opponents could bully our people with impunity are now
 over.Regrettably, and thanks to the treachery of the now long dissipated
 Searchlight-linked Smith/Blake/Graham rebel faction, the entire list has
 not only already been bombarded with lie-filled anti-BNP propaganda, but
 it has also without doubt been available to the far-left for the best
 part of a year already.

 Fortunately, however, the laws brought in to prevent animal rights
 extremists from harassing their opponents also serve as a huge deterrent
 to the use of such information to harass our members.

 It is to be expected that the press will trawl the list for a nationwide
 version of the story which broke in the Guardian when their undercover
 journalist Ian Cobain provided them with details of BNP members in London
 back in December 2006.

 At the time this led to a huge fuss not only about lead English Ballet
 dancer Simone Clarke, but also a member of staff at Buckingham Palace,
 medical practitioners, City high-flyers and other figures of note.

 Once all the fuss had died down, not one of them had lost their job or
 suffered any other problem other than the worry to which they were
 unfairly subjected. The story did, however, greatly aid our credibility
 and helped to break down the older image of the BNP as a party mainly for
 the northern working class.

 In the end, all such attempts to bully and intimidate our people blow up
 in the faces of our opponents. You can reassure any members who do come to
 you to express concern that this time won't be any different. Seasoned
 observers and switched-on members will recognise a clear pattern:

 Every December there's a big push to try to put people off the huge
 'spike'of members who are due to renew at the end of one year and the
 beginning of the next. Two years ago it was the Guardian infiltration
 leak, which blew upin their faces.

 Exactly a year ago, six months before the GLA election,there was a
 desperate attempt to destabilise the party and to hit our election
 war-chest by frightening people away - it failed and we made the big
 London Assembly breakthrough.

 And this December, just six months before the proportional representation
 European Parliamentary elections give us the chance for a gigantic
 leap into the mainstream big-time, we get another leak intended to 
 frighten
 the faint-hearted.

 It was absolutely obvious that the sensational BNP by-election victory in
 Boston at the end of last week would spark a desperate reaction from the
 Establishment and their 'plausibly deniable'far-left allies.

 We effectively hoovered up the entire UKIP vote in that contest - in the
 area where they got their best result in the entire country in the last
 European elections.

 This latest attack is not really directed against our own people, who are
 already tough-minded and know that nothing ever comes of this sort of
 bluster, so much as against the thousands of UKIPers who are thinking of
 joining us.

 It probably will frighten some of them, but it's water off aduck's back to
 the stout-hearts of the British National Party.

 Let's enjoy the publicity bonus!
