                               British Parliament

                                Westminster Hall

                           Wednesday 17 December 2008

                         [Mr. Frank Cook in the Chair]

                                   Libel Laws

   Motion made, and Question proposed, That the sitting be now
   adjourned.-(Mark Tami.)

      9.30 am

   Frank Cook (in the Chair): The first topic for consideration today is the
   operation of the libel laws. As I have no specific knowledge of what
   aspects of the subject are to be put before us, I thought it advisable to
   refer to "Erskine May". Its advice is as follows:

     "reflections must not be cast in debate upon the conduct of the
     Sovereign, the heir to the throne, or other members of the royal family,
     the Lord Chancellor, the Governor-General of an independent territory,
     the Speaker, the Chairman of Ways and Means, Members of either House of
     Parliament of judges of the superior courts of the United Kingdom,
     including persons holding the position of a judge, such as circuit
     judges and their deputies, as well as recorders."

   I am not saying that anyone will be so indiscreet as to do that. To do so,
   the decision must be based on a substantive motion to be placed before the
   House. We do not have time for that, but I am sure that everyone will bear
   in mind the advice that I offer. I call Mr. Denis MacShane.

   Mr. Denis MacShane (Rotherham) (Lab): Thank you, Mr. Cook. Believe me, I
   have no intention of transgressing your wise suggestions.

   I start with a short anecdote. I have just returned from Washington. With
   other Members of this House, I attended a meeting of the NATO
   Parliamentary Assembly. You, Mr. Cook, will be well aware of its workings,
   as you are a distinguished member of the assembly. We were invited to a
   reception at the Congress building on Monday night by Nancy Pelosi, the
   Speaker of the House and a dear friend of many of us. She took us to
   Congress and led me to sit in the Speaker's chair in the House of
   Representatives.

   As a political tourist, I found that most interesting. As I sat there, I
   reflected on this morning's debate, because Congress is poised once again
   to pass a new law to protect its citizens and all who live there-but from
   what? To protect them from this, our country, Britain. As in the 18th
   century, the British establishment is seeking to silence Americans who
   want to reveal the truth about the murkier goings-on in our interdependent
   world. I speak not, I am glad to say, about the Government but about the
   English legal system. Lawyers and courts are conspiring to shut down the
   cold light of independent thinking and writing about what some of the
   richest and most powerful people in the world are up to.

   The practice of libel tourism as it is known-the willingness of British
   courts to allow wealthy foreigners who do not live here to attack
   publications that have no connection with Britain-is now an international
   scandal. It shames Britain and makes a mockery of the idea that Britain is
   a protector of core democratic freedoms. Libel tourism sounds innocuous,
   but underneath the banal phrase is a major assault on freedom of
   information,

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 70WH

   which in today's complex world is more necessary than ever if evil, such
   as the jihad ideology that led to the Mumbai massacres, is not to
   flourish, and if those who traffic arms, blood diamonds, drugs and money
   to support Islamist extremist organisations that hide behind charitable
   status are not to be exposed.

   I put it to the House that it is unbelievable that the state legislatures
   of New York and Illinois, and Congress itself, are having to pass Bills to
   stop British courts seeking to fine and punish American journalists and
   writers for publishing books and articles that may be freely read in the
   United States but which a British judge has decided are offensive to
   wealthy foreigners who can hire lawyers in Britain to persuade a British
   court to become a new Soviet-style organ of censorship against freedom of
   expression.

   Richard Ottaway (Croydon, South) (Con): For a libel action to be
   successfully mounted in the United Kingdom, there would have to be a libel
   in the UK. All the laws in the world passed by the United States cannot
   stop that happening. Would the hon. Gentleman not agree?

   Mr. MacShane: That is self-evident, but the US is seeking to protect its
   citizens and those who reside there who write and publish material that
   would not be defamatory and that would be protected by the first amendment
   from facing heavy fines and heavy awards of costs in British courts that
   would then render it impossible or dangerous for such writers to travel to
   Britain. That is unacceptable between the two great countries of the
   Euro-Atlantic alliance.

   Richard Ottaway rose-

   Mr. MacShane: I wonder whether the hon. Gentleman might make his speech in
   his own time.

   It is worrying that 30 non-governmental organisations recently met human
   rights lawyers to express concern that libel tourists come to London to
   prevent the publication of NGO reports on parts of the world and
   individuals that, of course, rarely get much coverage in our newspapers.
   NGOs are an important source and conduit of information that is of
   interest to public policy and to the broader public, telling us what is
   going on and who is doing what to whom in parts of the world. These things
   need exposure. The NGOs are meeting lawyers because, thanks to libel
   tourism, some of the individuals mentioned in their reports can come here
   and attack those publications, seeking redress against distinguished
   organisations such as Human Rights Watch.

   We all know that the libel laws in Britain have always been the plaything
   of the rich. Too many editors believe that destroying people by revealing
   aspects of their private lives helps sell newspapers. I shall not abuse
   parliamentary privilege-although, Mr. Cook, "Erskine May" does not extend
   the protection that you quoted to newspapermen-by describing the sexual
   antics and peccadilloes of newspaper proprietors, editors and journalists.
   [Hon. Members: "Go on!"] Well, it is Christmas and I shall not be tempted
   down that path.

   If the editors of the Daily Mail or the News of the World, or Mr Murdoch
   or Lord Rothermere, ever suffered the invasion of privacy and the
   pestering of children and family and friends to gain tittle-tattle gossip
   of the sort that they inflict on others, they would be first in

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 71WH

   line to demand even stronger laws to protect privacy when no public
   interest or illegal wrong-doing was involved.

   Successive Governments have shied away from reforming libel and privacy
   laws, for fear of upsetting media friends. Stanley Baldwin was the last
   Prime Minister to have the courage to denounce the bullying behaviour of
   newspapers and their ideological crusades masquerading as news reporting,
   with his famous description of our papers enjoying

     "power without responsibility-the prerogative of the harlot throughout
     the ages."

   The Press Complaints Commission is utterly toothless, and its code of
   conduct is treated with contempt by the very editors who serve on it. The
   National Union of Journalists has a better code of conduct, but
   proprietors and editors refuse to co-operate with the NUJ to uphold high
   standards. No one wants to dictate who can or cannot be a journalist. As
   it is, too many decent journalists face unemployment as the economics of
   publishing printed media become difficult, if not impossible.

   We need a small claims libel court, or the defamation equivalent of an
   employment tribunal for the poor and vulnerable who are traduced by the
   press. We need limits on what a libel court can award by way of damages.

   Mr. Edward Garnier (Harborough) (Con): Is the hon. Gentleman not aware of
   the summary jurisdiction of the High Court in these matters?

   Mr. MacShane: Yes, I am. The hon. and learned Gentleman, of course, is an
   adornment to the libel bar. I am sure that we will be given many insights
   into its operations when he speaks in his capacity as the Opposition
   spokesman.

   There is no possibility of people securing a quick apology and redress. I
   believe that there should be no conditional fees except for those on
   modest incomes. Indeed, I would go so far as to say only those eligible
   for legal aid should be allowed conditional fees.

   Richard Ottaway: Why?

   Mr. MacShane: From a sedentary position, the hon. Gentleman asks why.
   Conditional fees are now being used to stack up multi-sum costs, with
   lawyers being completely out of control in what they charge. All that
   falls on the defendant if a single judge finds in favour of the plaintiff.
   Perhaps only one or two other countries work like that.

   The object of going to court is not to make it a racket for lawyers. The
   object should be to obtain a correction or an apology with due prominence
   and not to make mammoth financial gains. A time limit should be put in
   place for seeking redress, so that after the passage of, say, six months
   or a year it would no longer be possible to sue a publication or internet
   site. Newspaper editors and internet comment sites and blogs also have to
   accept responsibility. Too much is published in too many parts of the
   world that breaks all the deontological rules of journalism, and too many
   powerful politicians

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 72WH

   adopt the late General de Gaulle's view that news broadcasts and
   television should always reflect the views of the state.

   A particular problem surrounds internet blogs. Even on a well-run site,
   such as The Guardian comment is free site, the editors allow anonymous
   hate mailers to defame and insult people in a frightening manner. A simple
   rule might be to demand the publication of names and addresses, except
   where for good reason, as in a newspaper letters column, a name and
   address is withheld. Internet anonymity is now used too much to protect
   hate speech and defamatory insults.

   Much of that, however, cannot be regulated in one country alone, but
   requires a global sense of responsibility. In the meantime, the purpose of
   today's debate is to stress the need for urgent action to stop London
   being the world centre for assaults on freedom of expression. The US
   Congress, where I was on Monday night, now proposes to legislate through
   its Free Speech Protection Act 2008, which is expressly designed to
   protect Americans from British courts and judges seeking to curtail
   freedom of expression.

   The case arises from the Kafkaesque position of the writer Rachel
   Ehrenfeld, whose book, entitled "Funding Evil", examined the flow of money
   towards extremist organisations that preach the ideology of hate
   associated with Wahhabism and other democracy-denying aspects of
   fundamentalist Islamic ideology. It is not exactly a secret that a great
   deal of the money that has financed fundamentalist extremist organisations
   that support jihad has come from Saudi Arabia. Ms Ehrenfeld's book, which
   was published in America, not Britain, named a Saudi billionaire called
   Mr. Khalid bin Mahfouz. Although the book was published in the United
   States, and was not on sale in any British bookshop, he found lawyers to
   sue in Britain. A British judge imposed a fine and costs on Ms Ehrenfeld,
   and said that her book should be destroyed, even though she was not in the
   court. No American court would have entertained such overt censorship.

   The fullest examination is vital of those raising money, sometimes
   ostensibly for charitable work, but which ends up promoting fundamentalist
   ideology that scrambles young men's and boys' minds and leads them to
   become terrorists. There is no freedom of expression in Saudi Arabia, so
   it is the duty of others to expose what is happening. With the help of
   British libel lawyers, Mr. Mahfouz has launched 33 suits against those who
   are investigating this important area of public concern. Cambridge
   University Press was obliged to pulp its book "Alms for Jihad", written by
   Robert Collins and J. Millard Burr, rather than face a libel action in
   British courts, which seem at the moment to side with those who finance
   extremism rather than those who seek to curb it. The case of Mr. Nadhmi
   Auchi also comes to mind. What is happening when Cambridge University
   Press, not some odd, little, obsessive publishing house, but one of the
   flowers of British publishing for centuries, has to pulp a book because
   British courts will not uphold freedom of expression?

   A Tunisian has used the British courts to sue the Dubai television
   network, al-Arabiya, which broadcasts in Arabic. Last November, a British
   judge awarded the man -L-165,000 without al-Arabiya being in court. Mr.
   Mohammed Sawalha attacked this summer's celebrations of the 60th
   anniversary of the state of

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 73WH

   Israel and referred to the "Jewish evil" in Britain. That was reported on
   the political website, Harry's place, and immediately Mr. Sawalha
   threatened to sue. At a time when we need the maximum examination of who
   is financing ideology that leads to terrorism, we find that British
   courts, judges and lawyers are acting in the opposite direction to silence
   investigations. I doubt whether any of the lawyers, the judge or court
   officials in question can read Arabic or have any real acquaintance with
   Wahhabism or Islamic fundamentalist ideology, and yet they act as
   defenders of those who promote extremist ideology, not those who try to
   expose it.

   After the scandal of London being the home to many preachers of hate and
   militant Islamist ideology, in the 1990s and into this century, against
   whom the British authorities refused to move until July 2005, when the
   scales were lifted from some, but not all, eyes, another part of the
   British establishment-judges and lawyers-are protecting those accused of
   funding anti-democratic ideology and seeking to punish those who expose
   this evil. Quite rightly, American law-makers have moved to protect their
   citizens against such extraordinary decisions by the British legal system.
   Rather than allow the US Congress to pass laws to uphold freedom of
   speech, the House of Commons should move to outlaw libel tourism.

   Moving away from ideology, the surreal nature of libel tourism can be
   found in the case of the Danish paper, Ekstra Bladet, which found itself
   being sued by the Iceland-based bank, Kaupthing, after it criticised it.
   Kaupthing's default has caused distress to British savers, and every
   Member will have a constituent who has lost money and is very concerned.
   The collapse and wrongdoing of Kaupthing might be about to return Iceland
   to a rural economy. One would have thought, therefore, that exposure of
   the bank's practices would have been in the widest public interest, but
   no. The British libel firm, Schilling and Lom-it certainly made plenty of
   shillings out of this case-which seems to specialise in touting for
   business, along with the infamous Carter-Ruck, acted for Kaupthing in
   London on the grounds that the articles critical of Kaupthing were
   available on the web. Again, one might have hoped that a British judge
   would have simply thrown out the case, but of course libel law is a very
   lucrative business for those small numbers of solicitors and barristers
   who practise it.

   Consideration needs to be given to the role of one particular judge. I
   shall not name him, because he is an honourable man, but it cannot be
   right that one area of law is principally in the hands of a single judge.
   There are not three or four judges discussing this and thereby creating a
   kind of common law, in which different opinions can be challenged.

   I could cite further examples of rich Russian and Ukrainian oligarchs
   criticised in publications with no, or nugatory, circulation or presence
   in the UK, mainly through the web, using British courts to seek to close
   down or attack their critics. I am informed that there will be a ruling
   today about an article in TheNew York Times in a case brought by a
   plaintiff here in London. I do not know what the result will be, but why
   on earth is a British judge deciding on, or even hearing, a case against
   one of the world's great papers, simply because the plaintiff does not
   have the courage to take his case to, or knows that it would not stand up
   in, a New York court?

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 74WH

   We need to end libel tourism. It would be helpful if the Law Society
   investigated the behaviour of firms such as Schilling and Lom and
   Carter-Ruck, because actively touting for business is a serious problem.
   It will require legislation in our Parliament, not in the US Congress, to
   bring libel tourism to an end, and I welcome the Culture, Media and Sport
   Committee's decision to hold an investigation into libel law. However,
   will the Minister examine whether the draft Civil Law Reform Bill, which
   the House will deal with in this session, could include a small clause on
   libel tourism? Such a clause could assert that any action for defamation
   in a British court would require that the publication be based in the UK
   and that the plaintiff have a strong connection with the UK. The old legal
   doctrine of forum non conveniens needs to be asserted-people should sue in
   the country where the publication was issued and of which they are a
   citizen. Damages should not be greater than -L-10,000 and costs should
   have to be met by the plaintiff with conditional fees available only to
   those who would qualify for legal aid. Furthermore, reference to a link or
   some other publication would not be grounds for a libel action. Such a
   clause could go further and enshrine in law the so-called Reynolds ruling,
   which allows a defence of public interest in reporting on individuals. A
   plaintiff should have to prove malice and a reckless disregard for the
   truth, to paraphrase US defamation law. In these times when swindlers have
   been allowed to create their pyramids of debt, we need stronger journalism
   and judges who defend the public's right to know and not the lawyer's
   right to use the law to maximise his profit on behalf of causes that are
   not worthy of consideration by a British court.

   I am grateful to have been awarded this debate. I will listen to comments
   from hon. Members and from the Opposition spokesman, the hon. and learned
   Member for Harborough (Mr. Garnier), who, as I said, is himself one of the
   adornments of the libel Bar in Britain. British citizens deserve
   protection against the lies and invasion of privacy that some of our
   newspapers indulge in, but Britain should not be a new world centre in
   which wealthy foreigners can seek redress against writers of publications
   that have little connection with our country. It is time for libel tourism
   to be ended, and it is better if the House of Commons and not the US
   Congress takes in hand the necessary reforms to stop this practice that
   shames our democracy.

   Frank Cook (in the Chair): The protocol of 90-minute debates in this
   Chamber requires us to start the first of the three wind-up speeches at
   10.30. That means that we have 39 minutes between now and then, and I have
   five individuals seeking to catch my eye. I ask those Members to bear the
   time limitations in mind when they make their speeches, and also when they
   accept or respond to interventions.

      9.51 am

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 74WH-continued

   Mr. Andrew Pelling (Croydon, Central) (Ind): I congratulate the right hon.
   Member for Rotherham (Mr. MacShane) on securing the debate. The timing is
   important because English PEN and Index on Censorship are conducting their
   own public inquiry into the conduct of libel laws. The Culture, Media and
   Sport Committee

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 75WH

   looked last year into the issue of privacy intrusion and the prospects of
   being able to deal with it solely through self-regulation in the media. It
   will also be going on specifically to consider this issue, so the debate
   is timely.

   I should like to make some declarations of interest. I am a client of the
   excellent Carter-Ruck and I am currently taking recourse to the libel
   courts regarding issues relating to the media.

   It is important that we recognise the vital role that the press plays in
   underpinning our liberal democracy-the way in which it endeavours to
   secure open government and to hold those in the public sector to account.
   In some ways, we need to ask why it is that the news media has to play
   such an important role-perhaps it is because the strength of the Executive
   within our political system is so strong that often Parliament is more
   neutered in that role compared with the media.

   As 1960s' children, many of us have grown up with an awareness of the
   importance of the national media's role. In the US, we all remember the
   role that Woodward and Bernstein played in Watergate. Moreover, I remember
   the campaigning way in which The Sunday Times ran story after story on how
   the parents of children who had taken thalidomide had been so badly let
   down by both the drug companies and Government.

   It is often said that the pen is mightier than the sword. Indeed, the pen
   is very mighty, which is why we have a legal system that ensures that if
   the media behave irresponsibly, people have recourse to the libel courts.
   Very often damage is done to families when kiss-and-tell stories or other
   revelations take place, and that damage is left behind for many years to
   come. Many people might well be tempted to tell their own story. Perhaps
   they might be offered money to tell stories, but they may all live to
   regret it subsequently.

   However, we must be cautious about entering into a situation in which
   libel laws are greatly restricted, particularly when we remember that it
   is not necessarily Russian billionaires or those who can buy their way
   into protection who are affected. We just have to think about what
   happened to Kate and Gerry McCann. Four newspapers thought it appropriate
   and responsible to suggest that the McCanns had been responsible for the
   death of Madeleine and the disposal of her body. It is important to
   remember that it was the courts that brought the libel to an end, and the
   newspapers had to publish, on their front pages, in an unprecedented way,
   apologies to Kate and Gerry McCann.

   I admit that I was frightened to come to this debate and to express my
   views about the media. One could be subjected to unbridled retribution by
   the media if one were to make comments about the appropriateness of libel
   laws. I hope that those who report my speech will quote me in full when I
   say that I feel strongly that it is important for Members of Parliament
   not to be intimidated by the press in speaking out on this issue.

   I have had my own personal experience. A style of cut-and-paste journalism
   led to a report that suggested that when I was unwell, I had managed to
   work in the City, but not here. Those allegations were false. After
   several calls with journalists, I finally came upon a very empathetic
   female journalist from The Daily Telegraph who realised half way through
   her interview that she

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 76WH

   was dealing with someone who had suffered previously from mental ill
   health. Unfortunately, very often journalists are looking for the story
   and not necessarily for the full truth.

   We must bear it in mind that it is often particular newspapers from a
   particular newspaper group that perform the worst. If we look at the
   number of complaints that go to the Press Complaints Commission, it is
   clear that one group has far more complaints made against it. We must not
   cast aspersions across the whole of the media as a result of the behaviour
   of a very limited number of journalists. I was interested to see that the
   book "Flat Earth News"-recommended to me by Alastair Campbell in the
   briefest of chats-referred to a particular newspaper group that acts with
   unmitigated spite to cripple reputations, and to kill ideas regardless of
   justice and truth.

   I am very mindful of others who wish to speak, so I will bring my remarks
   to a conclusion after speaking briefly about the operation of conditional
   fee agreements, which was criticised earlier. CFAs are often wrongly
   described as a contingency fee agreement. There appears to be the
   perception that a lawyer in a successful case is entitled to a percentage
   of the damages won. However, the arrangement does not work in that way. If
   the case is lost, the lawyer gets nothing. If the case is won, the lawyer
   is entitled to be paid his basic charges in addition to a success fee,
   which is a percentage uplift on the basic charges. The winning client is
   entitled to seek to recover from the losing opponent his reasonable costs,
   which are assessed by the court if not agreed, and which may include a
   reasonable success fee and a reasonable after-the-event insurance premium.

   Both the level of the success fee and the amount of the premium are also
   subject to assessment by the court if the costs cannot be agreed. Success
   fees are typically staggered. If a case is settled before proceedings are
   issued, the success fee will normally be capped at 25 per cent. It only
   increases to 100 per cent. if the case looks as though it will progress to
   trial, where the risks are much higher. The availability of ATE insurance
   means that if a client loses, the insurance will cover-up to a maximum of
   the indemnity in the original policy-the newspaper defendant's cost. It is
   clear that libel lawyers under CFAs act for many people who are on income
   support, including individuals who may well have been falsely accused of
   extremely serious crimes.

   There is great danger in how the Government and Parliament act because, in
   many ways, they always take rights away from those who are in the middle
   of society. The idea that, somehow, only those who are on income support
   can have access to CFAs strikes me as being yet another blow against the
   lower middle class and their ability to access the courts. Complaints are
   made about the cost of libel courts. Unfortunately, the reality is that
   the cost of all courts stops many of my constituents having proper access
   to them to defend their rights, whatever the issue.

   Several hon. Members rose-

   Frank Cook (in the Chair): Order. There are 30 minutes left for Back
   Benchers to speak in the debate and three hon. Members are bidding to make
   a speech.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 77WH

      10 am

   Norman Lamb (North Norfolk) (LD): I congratulate the right hon. Member for
   Rotherham (Mr. MacShane) on securing the debate, which is on an incredibly
   important subject. I look forward to hearing the Minister's response to
   the extremely important points that were made on the phenomenon of libel
   tourism. The hon. Member for Croydon, Central (Mr. Pelling) also made some
   important points on the protection of individuals against irresponsible
   journalism, and I absolutely accept his concerns.

   I apologise for the fact that I must leave before the end of the debate,
   but I have a long-standing commitment to meet. I warned you of that
   earlier, Mr. Cook.

   I have two reasons for contributing to the debate. First, I have an
   interest in, and commitment to, the incredibly important principle of
   freedom of expression. Secondly, I have an interest in serious and
   responsible investigative journalism. Those two things are essential to
   the proper functioning of a liberal, democratic society. It is essential
   that journalists are able to perform that function, to root out
   wrongdoing, whether it is by Government officials, politicians or private
   individuals, and to hold Governments to account. As the right hon.
   Gentleman indicated, it could protect us from harm.

   There are widespread concerns among journalists and others that the UK
   libel laws, combined with the cost of defamation litigation, act as a
   constraint on, and an impediment to, the effective and legitimate work of
   investigative journalists. Those concerns have been heightened by the
   application of libel law to those who contribute to the internet and those
   who write blogs. I have no interest in people who make wild allegations
   that are not supported by facts. They do not deserve the protection of the
   law.

   I shall offer one case study-I stress that I do not know all the details
   or the full story-that illustrates how the threat of defamation
   proceedings using, primarily but not exclusively, UK libel laws may
   succeed in closing down legitimate inquiry and reporting. I should also
   stress that I do not want to use this opportunity to take advantage of the
   privilege that we enjoy to make fresh allegations against any individual.

   The case involves Nadhmi Auchi, whom the right hon. Gentleman mentioned.
   He is a British citizen-an Iraqi exile-and he is reported to be a
   multi-billionaire. He was convicted in France in 2003 of fraud in a trial
   involving the oil company Elf. Importantly, he continues to assert his
   innocence of the charges-there was a conviction, but he is pursuing routes
   of appeal against it. He was barred from entering the United States in
   2005. My interest in the matter is in his connections to Tony Rezco, who
   was convicted of fraud, money laundering and bribe-related charges in
   Illinois, and who is currently in prison pending sentencing. We understand
   that sentencing has been delayed, and it has been suggested that he should
   talk to federal prosecutors, especially about allegations against Illinois
   Governor Blagojevich, which are being investigated. There is political
   interest in the US because of the connections between Rezko and
   President-elect Obama. I make no allegation at all relating to the latter.

   There have been reports that a company related to Mr. Auchi registered a
   loan of $3.5 million to Tony Rezko on 23 May 2005. That and other alleged
   connections are obviously of great interest to investigative journalists

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 78WH

   and others. More to the point, it is legitimate to investigate such a
   matter, given that Mr. Auchi is a prominent British citizen with political
   connections in this country and overseas. As I said, it is not appropriate
   to go into more detail, but it is alleged that Mr. Auchi and his lawyers,
   Carter-Ruck, have been making strenuous efforts to close down public
   debate. Of course, it is absolutely legitimate for any citizen to demand
   accurate and rigorous investigation and reporting. The question is whether
   UK libel laws have the disproportionate effect of discouraging legitimate
   reporting. Many believe that they do.

   On 28 June, Private Eye reported Mr. Auchi's instructions to Carter-Ruck.
   The article states:

     "Carter-Ruck's first target was a series of revelatory articles"-

   concerning Mr. Auchi-

     "printed in the Observer in 2003, which American bloggers and
     journalists were starting to notice."

   Later, however, the article states:

     "You will search in vain now, however, to find most of the Observer's
     reports."

   Those reports were from five years ago. It has been reported in the US
   that Carter-Ruck has been writing to US and British newspapers and
   websites demanding removal of the material that it deems defamatory of its
   client. Many are concerned about the fact that creating a link on a blog
   to a newspaper article, which may have been available for several years to
   anyone searching the internet, can result in action being threatened or
   taken. Is that legitimate? Alternatively, should a blogger be able to rely
   on the journalistic integrity of reliable news sources when a story has
   already been published and when it has existed for several years?

   What steps should be taken? A doctrine arising from Reynolds v. Times
   Newspapers Ltd and others, 1999, seeks to protect serious investigative
   journalists. Guidance given during that case, as I understand it, included
   10 principles that investigative journalists should follow. However,
   subsequent cases appear not to have applied the principles as intended by
   the Reynolds guidance, and the protection offered to serious,
   investigative journalists has not been as great as had been anticipated
   following the judgment.

   Jameel and others v. The Wall Street Journal Europe Sprl, which was heard
   in the House of Lords, reasserted the importance of the principles
   enshrined in the Reynolds judgment, and there is some evidence that
   courts' interpretation of the principles appears to have improved since.
   However, the question is whether those principles should be enshrined in
   statute to give them greater force and clarity. Is there also a case for
   looking at the burden of proof? I make no judgment about what ultimately
   should happen. I suggest that this is an appropriate area for
   consideration by a royal commission.

   This is a legitimate area that needs consideration. As the right hon.
   Gentleman said, it is a long time since libel laws have been looked at and
   further consideration is long overdue.

      10.10 am

   Michael Gove (Surrey Heath) (Con): I congratulate the right hon. Member
   for Rotherham (Mr. MacShane) on securing the debate and the hon. Members
   for

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 79WH

   Croydon, Central (Mr. Pelling) and for North Norfolk (Norman Lamb) on
   their speeches, both of which contained much good sense.

   I draw attention to my declaration in the Register of Members' Interests.
   As a journalist, I write for The Times and have been an executive of that
   newspaper as news editor. I am committed to the principle of free
   expression and the freedom of the press. That is not only a consequence of
   my professional career and vocation, but because I believe that it is only
   through an effective free press that the exercise and abuse of power can
   be monitored effectively.

   While this country has the police, the courts and a system designed to
   track down and punish those who do wrong, the press has historically
   played an invaluable role in bringing such people to the attention of the
   courts and the police. Sometimes the press is needed to draw our attention
   to the failure of the authorities in the pursuit of wrongdoing, extremism
   or other activities that threaten the public interest. Only this week, The
   Times pointed out that someone who has connections to Islamist extremism
   that might concern us all has been employed as an adviser to the
   Metropolitan police's Muslim contact unit.

   Not just newspapers, but other institutions that exercise a journalistic
   or quasi-journalistic function have exposed extremism in public life.
   Think-tanks such as Policy Exchange, which I used to chair, and the Centre
   for Social Cohesion have pointed out the extent of extremist
   influence-particularly but not exclusively Islamist extremist influence-in
   British public life. Because of the international nature of the extremist
   threat, there are examples of the press being more effective than states
   or international institutions in exposing such dangers. An example is the
   work of Claudia Rosett at The Wall Street Journal in exposing the failure
   of the UN effectively to police sanctions against Saddam Hussein. In all
   those areas, free expression and a free press have been vital in exposing
   abuses.

   The right hon. Member for Rotherham pointed out that it is of particular
   concern to all of us who are attached to the freedom of the press that
   individuals who have been alleged to have links to extremism have used
   British courts to close down the investigation or publication of
   allegations that are in the public interest. He mentioned the examples of
   Khalid bin Mahfouz and Mohammed Sawalha, a British resident who tries to
   close down legitimate investigation into extremism on the internet.

   As the right hon. Gentleman and the hon. Member for North Norfolk pointed
   out, there is in effect a public interest defence in law for the sort of
   investigative journalism that I am sure we would all applaud. The Reynolds
   defence offers journalists and newspapers a form of qualified privilege.
   That is qualitatively different from the sort of privilege enjoyed in
   courts and by Members of Parliament because it allows newspapers the
   comfort that it is legitimate for them to publish allegations provided
   that the process followed demonstrates that the journalism they are
   engaged in is of high seriousness, that appropriate steps have been taken
   to ensure that the allegations are in the public interest and that they
   are being properly investigated. They do not

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 80WH

   subsequently have to prove justification to the same threshold required in
   other cases.

   A problem with the Reynolds defence is that instead of being an aid to
   free expression, according to some it has become an obstacle to free
   expression. The guidance that the courts originally gave newspapers to
   help them publish material in the public interest has become another set
   of hurdles that they have to clear. The hon. Member for North Norfolk
   pointed out that Jameel and others v. Wall Street Journal Europe Sprl made
   it perfectly clear that the Reynolds defence should help, not hinder, free
   expression.

   There has been only sporadic implementation of that defence and a
   misunderstanding of it in many courts. That is why at the very least it is
   worth exploring whether we can enshrine the principles of the Reynolds
   defence in statute. That would send a clear signal from Parliament to the
   courts that the Reynolds defence is in effect as a public interest defence
   that allows the publication of material that should be part of public
   debate, particularly when serious issues such as extremism and terrorism
   need to be investigated.

   Dr. Evan Harris (Oxford, West and Abingdon) (LD): The hon. Gentleman has
   set out some components of the Reynolds defence. I believe that part of
   that approach of responsible journalism is to report the denial of the
   allegations by the accused. That is not a requirement, but I am interested
   to hear his view on the matter.

   Michael Gove: The hon. Gentleman is right that broadly 10 principles are
   outlined in the Reynolds defence, one of which is the strong suggestion
   that an effort should be made to secure the response of the individual
   against whom allegations are made. It is a basic principle of good
   journalism that the other person's case should be heard.

   I would not wish to erect those 10 principles into 10 absolute hurdles.
   Discretion should be exercised in the courts and any change to the law
   should acknowledge that. The important points are whether the material
   that is published is in the public interest, whether the case is urgent
   and important enough to justify publication and whether overall the
   journalists, the newspaper or the blog can demonstrate that they have done
   everything in their power to ascertain the truth and importance of the
   allegations that are published.

   On costs, the point has been made that conditional fee agreements can
   raise profound questions of a chilling effect on publication. Indeed, Lord
   Hoffman has pointed out that freedom of expression may be seriously
   inhibited by conditional fee agreements. The hon. Member for Croydon,
   Central has pointed out that they can be helpful to individuals without
   resources who have been defamed. I do not wish to see the end of them, but
   it is important that an effort is made not to perpetuate the chilling
   effect on publication in the ongoing review into the costs of civil
   judgment. In particular, small and independent newspapers, think-tanks,
   research groups and other organisations that are vital components of a
   free and rigorous culture of debate and accountability must be protected
   in any structure that we create.

   Finally, it has been pointed out that internet publication can lead to
   links being created to articles that were published and brought into the
   public domain four or five years previously because they remain on an
   internet

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 81WH

   archive. That may be done to substantiate a point that is being made
   afresh. An individual who creates such a link to material that is already
   in the public domain can be sued. At the very least, it is questionable
   whether we should allow the courts to pursue an individual who in all
   innocence creates a link to an article that has not been the subject of a
   defamation action. That individual may be sued because of the desire of
   another to pick off a weak link who he considers to be rich pickings and a
   suitably unprotected victim. In those circumstances, it would be
   appropriate for the court to ask, "Why did you not go for the big boys
   first?"

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 81WH-continued

      10.19 am

   Richard Ottaway (Croydon, South) (Con): I join others in congratulating
   the right hon. Member for Rotherham (Mr. MacShane) on securing this
   debate. It has been a particularly high-quality debate, but the battle
   lines have been drawn. The right hon. Member for Rotherham and my hon.
   Friend the Member for Surrey Heath (Michael Gove), with their
   distinguished journalistic backgrounds, veer towards the freedom of
   expression side of the argument; my neighbour the hon. Member for Croydon,
   Central (Mr. Pelling) veers towards the protection of the individual, and
   I will come down on his side in my remarks.

   I draw it to the attention of the right hon. Member for Rotherham that at
   the beginning, Mr. Cook, you sensibly quoted from "Erskine May", but he
   has called in public, in the mother of Parliaments, for an investigation
   of two firms of solicitors. I sincerely hope that he has something with
   which to back that up, because it is one of the most serious allegations
   that can be made against a component part of the judiciary.

   Mr. MacShane: I should have declared an interest as a former president of
   the National Union of Journalists; I hope that all of us here declare all
   our interests. In my region of south Yorkshire, we have taken action
   against solicitors in connection with moneys and compensation paid to
   miners. The notion that an ordinary individual, let alone an MP in the
   House of Commons, cannot ask the Law Society to investigate any
   solicitors' firm is quite remarkable. Such outfits tout for business. They
   boast on their websites that they will obtain redress. The Law Society
   needs to take the matter into consideration.

   Richard Ottaway: There is a world of difference between complaining about
   the activities of a firm of solicitors in conducting its business and
   calling on the Law Society to investigate, but I will let the matter rest
   there. Perhaps I should have declared at the outset my interest as a
   practicing solicitor, although, having had the conduct of libel actions in
   the past, I no longer have any libel practice.

   What we have here is the clash of three conflicting rights against each
   other: freedom of expression, the right to privacy and the right not to be
   libelled. There is an important distinction to be made between the right
   to privacy and the right not to be libelled, or between privacy and libel.
   If someone engages, for example, in sadomasochistic sex in private and a
   newspaper publishes that fact, it is open to the people concerned to
   complain that their right to privacy has been breached. If someone has
   said, obiter, "Sadomasochistic sex is not the sort of thing I get up to,"
   the press are quite right to say that

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 82WH

   that person does not have a right to privacy, because he is, in effect,
   being a hypocrite. If, however, someone does not engage in sadomasochistic
   sex but a newspaper says that he is, that is libel. There is a big
   difference between privacy and libel, and I hope that on another occasion
   we might have a debate on the right to privacy rather than on libel.

   The press focus on the right to freedom of expression. My hon. Friend the
   Member for Surrey Heath highlighted the fact that the press have done
   noble service in exposing crimes. However, it is not that that people are
   complaining about; of course the press have a role in exposing crime,
   wrongdoing and hypocrisy. They are complaining about individuals' right to
   privacy being breached. That is where I suspect my hon. Friend and I
   interpret the same set of facts differently with regard to what is in the
   public interest. Is it in the public interest that someone who engages in
   a private activity on his own property should have that fact published in
   a newspaper or broadcast?

   The right hon. Member for Rotherham discussed the publication of a New
   York Times article and its worries about libel laws here. The point, which
   relates to my intervention, is that if The New York Times is published in
   the United Kingdom, the newspaper must stand by its statements under the
   jurisdiction of UK laws. If the United States passes a law saying that
   that cannot happen, that will not affect what goes on here, because the
   United Kingdom is the jurisdiction to which any publication or statement
   made in the United Kingdom is subject. That applies to books as well. A
   book published in the United Kingdom, although it may have been written
   overseas, is subject to UK laws.

   Mr. MacShane: It is very decent of the hon. Gentleman to give way. I do
   not want to eat into the former Front-Bench spokesman's time, but is he
   aware of the consequences of following that path of argument? The libel
   tourism Act that is now before two US state legislatures, and that may
   possibly go to Congress, will allow an American citizen to countersue in a
   US court and for an American court to impose damages and fines on someone
   who sued in a British court.

   Mr. Pelling: American imperialism at its best.

   Mr. MacShane: No, it is not that. It is British imperialism to think that
   a British court can stop the publication of a book, order it to be pulped
   and impose a fine on an American writer for something that has not been
   sold or displayed in a book shop in this country. We must understand forum
   non conveniens. We sue in the country where the person is principally
   based and where the publication is published, not in a country where a few
   copies may be bought.

   Richard Ottaway: The right hon. Gentleman repeats points that he made in
   his speech. What the Americans do and how they conduct themselves in the
   courts is entirely a matter for them. The Front-Bench spokesman, my hon.
   and learned Friend the Member for Harborough (Mr. Garnier), knows far more
   about the libel laws than I do and will no doubt touch on that. I am
   making the simple point that a publication in this country is subject to
   UK laws.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 83WH

   On the question of contingency fees, I think that they are one of the most
   significant developments in the protection of the individual. Before their
   introduction, the only people who could run a libel action were those on
   legal aid and the very rich, not the middle class. I am happy to be a part
   of the middle class and to stand up for its values-

   Mr. MacShane rose-

   Richard Ottaway: The right hon. Gentleman may say nay-

   Mr. MacShane: No, I actually agree with the hon. Gentleman on this.

   Richard Ottaway: I congratulate the Government on introducing that
   measure-I think it was this Government that introduced it-because it
   allows the individual a chance to fight back if he feels that his privacy
   has been breached or that he has been libelled.

   My hon. Friend the Member for Surrey Heath spoke about Lord Hoffmann's
   remarks on contingency fees in the House of Lords. In the same judgment,
   Lord Hoffmann said that the right to expression does not trump the right
   to privacy or the right not to be libelled, that there must be a balance
   and that one was not to exclude the other.

   One good suggestion made by the right hon. Member for Rotherham was that
   of a small claims court for libel action. I had not heard that idea before
   today. The MP whose local newspaper has misreported him wants some little
   vehicle to make his point. The Press Complaints Commission still has a
   long way to go to establish its credibility fully on that front, so such a
   vehicle has some attraction. If some inquiry goes into it, as the hon.
   Member for North Norfolk (Norman Lamb) suggested, I hope that it will be
   on the agenda.

   Bob Spink (Castle Point) (Ind): Is the hon. Gentleman aware that there is
   a form of small claims court in the pre-defamation protocol that must be
   gone through? Using that, I have settled out of court with a small sum: an
   immediate apology in the newspaper and -L-100 paid to my local church. I
   settled in that way with a number of newspapers that repeated a defamation
   almost innocently. We should use the large hammer to crack the large nut.

   Richard Ottaway: I seem to be in a minority in not being subject or party
   to a libel action, so I do not speak with any experience. My hon.
   Friend-excuse me, the hon. Gentleman-makes a useful contribution.
   [Interruption.] He is now an ex-Friend, but he is still a personal friend.

   The media in this country are tremendous. They play an important role.
   They are, of course, self-appointed and self-selecting, but their
   contribution to British society is none the less paramount. However, they
   must realise that at times, some elements of the media can behave
   irresponsibly. The libel laws exist to protect the citizens of this
   country, and those laws should not be eroded.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 84WH

      10.29 am

   Dr. Evan Harris (Oxford, West and Abingdon) (LD): I should also start by
   declaring interests, in that I have also had to seek recourse to talk to
   lawyers and indeed pay them in relation to a media attack. However, I did
   so with a heavy heart and the matter has not yet gone any further into
   court. That is because I think that there is a real challenge in this
   country at the moment in respect of threats to free speech. I do not think
   that that particular right-the right to free expression-receives enough
   protection in the law or by the police.

   My record on this issue personally is one of campaigning generally for
   more freedom of expression, for example in respect of the abolition of the
   law on blasphemy. I did not have the opportunity to check if hon. Members
   who are arguing for free speech in respect of the press voted the right
   way on all the votes that we had on the abolition of that law, but I
   certainly welcome the fact that we no longer have it. Indeed, I played a
   part in defeating the Government's original proposals on religious hatred,
   which were a real threat to free expression.

   There is also an issue in respect of overuse of section 5 of the Public
   Order Act 1986, both in terms of its scope and the way that the police
   actually police it. What we are dealing with now is another area where
   there needs to be some work done, and I speak on behalf of my party in
   this respect.

   It is important to pay tribute to organisations that are not necessarily
   sponsoring this debate but are sponsoring calls for a review of the libel
   laws, such as PEN, the writers' organisation that has done so much work in
   campaigning for the civil rights and human rights of writers abroad and
   indeed for the freedom to author in this country, and Index on Censorship.
   There is also Article 19, the organisation that is 20 years old this year,
   which has a fantastic record abroad more than here in seeking to ensure
   that there is freedom of expression.

   One of the questions that needs to be asked, as well as the questions
   about the libel laws, is whether or not the Government are concerned about
   other issues that affect the ability of the press and others to speak
   freely. There is a proposal for a defamation of religion provision at the
   UN and there is a law against holocaust denial, which emanates from the
   EU. It is an outrageous thing to deny the holocaust, but I do not think
   that we should criminalise being wrong.

   Also, we have a law in this country on criminal defamation, which relates
   to this debate. So I would be interested to know if the Government can
   explain what their proposals are on this issue, because in answer to a
   question from Lord Lester of Herne Hill on 13 May 2008 about whether or
   not they planned to abolish the common law offence of criminal libel, the
   Government said:

     "We plan to seek views on the possible abolition of criminal libel in
     respect of defamatory material as part of a wider consultation on
     certain other aspects of defamation law. We hope to publish a
     consultation paper later in the year."-[Official Report, House of Lords,
     13 May 2008; Vol. 701, c. WA120.]

   We are coming to the end of the year now and it would be very helpful if
   the Minister said where that consultation paper is now and whether or not
   it is going to be forthcoming.

   Of course, we also have an offence in this country of seditious libel. It
   is never used, but it is allowed by other

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 85WH

   countries to justify their having it and using that law to hold people
   down and repress them in terms of what they can say.

   I do not think that there is any doubt that there is a problem in this
   country, not just in respect of the way that libel laws work and the
   problem of libel tourism, but the fact that there is now a chilling effect
   from this matter. So it is not only the cases that come to court that
   should concern us and the judgments therein, or the sort of people who are
   coming to court, but the fact that this matter is now known, it is out
   there and there must be some restraint being placed on authorship. That
   sort of restraint, and that chilling effect, is something that we must
   take into account and regret almost as much as the problems that exist.

   As hon. Members have already said in what has been an excellent debate-I
   do not have time to try to respond to all the points that have been made,
   nor would it be appropriate for me to do so-it is important to distinguish
   the problem of libel from the allegation of a problem of privacy law. That
   is because I think that in this area Paul Dacre, the editor-in-chief of
   The Daily Mail, was wrong. Ever since we signed up to the European
   convention on human rights, judges have had to balance article 8 with
   article 10 and I think that the emerging case law does that appropriately.
   I also think that Mr. Justice Eady has done it appropriately and if it is
   claimed that he did not do it appropriately, there is, of course, the
   right of appeal to the Court of Appeal and to the Law Lords. In
   particular, my view of the Moseley judgment, having read it, is that it
   was mature, detailed, balanced and reasonable, and we should separate out
   that issue-the privacy law-from concerns that the media have about the
   libel law.

   There are several questions raised by the libel law. Is the burden of
   proof correct? Is it right that the defendant has to prove that a claim is
   true rather than the claimant having to prove that it is false, and are
   there sufficient defences? A second question is what should we do about
   internet sites and internet service providers and about issues related to
   jurisdiction?

   I think that it is appropriate to respond to the interesting, excellent
   and typically provocative speech by the right hon. Member for Rotherham
   (Mr. MacShane) who introduced the debate. There is also an interesting
   issue about a small claims libel court and perhaps that is something that
   should be pursued. In respect of conditional fee agreements being
   restricted only to people who are qualified for legal aid, I think that
   that would be too restrictive. That suggestion is more a comment on how
   restrictive it is to obtain access to legal aid; one does not have to be
   in any way wealthy or well off not to qualify.

   I would refer the right hon. Member for Rotherham and other hon. Members
   to the excellent report of the Constitutional Affairs Committee-its third
   report of the 2005-06 Session-that covered some of the issues that have
   been discussed today around CFAs. The right hon. Member questioned if
   there should be more of a time limit; my understanding is that there was a
   time limit on libel actions.

   Mr. Pelling: One year.

   Dr. Harris: Indeed; the hon. Gentleman tells me that the time limit is one
   year.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 86WH

   There is a further point about what we should do about blogs. I am not
   sure that it is possible to ban anonymity on blogs, because that would
   just encourage people to give false or incomplete names and addresses, so
   we must have a more holistic solution to that problem.

   Bob Spink: The hon. Gentleman is asking what we should do about internet
   defamation and blogs. Would it be so difficult, in fact, to prevent
   anonymity? Where newspapers set up sites so that readers can make
   comments, they never force readers to give their true e-mail addresses,
   although newspapers would be able to do that; they would be able to force
   readers to give their true e-mail addresses. Would that not be a jolly
   good start, to ensure that people who wanted to say something had to
   identify themselves, either through their e-mail address or some other
   means, rather than just putting "Mickey Mouse" and saying some rather
   stupid and awful things, as they do?

   Dr. Harris: It would be possible, but of course it is also possible to set
   up a temporary hotmail e-mail account, for example, so that would not be
   the overall solution.

   The right hon. Member for Rotherham also questioned whether law firms were
   behaving appropriately. I am not sure about that issue. To a certain
   extent, I agree with the hon. Member for Croydon, North on this
   issue-sorry, the hon. Member for Croydon, Central.

   Richard Ottaway (Croydon, South) (Con): Croydon, South.

   Dr. Harris: I will get there in the end, as I head down through Croydon,
   which is a fascinating place, I am sure.

   As I was saying, I am not sure that attacking law firms for touting for
   business is appropriate. Clearly, it is not an offence to tout for
   business, nor is it wrong or an offence to invite the Law Society to
   inquire. However, I think that that suggestion is probably a red herring.
   We need to deal with the law rather than the practice of solicitors.

   In respect of some of the issues that we face, it is important to
   recognise just how absurd the problem of libel tourism is. The Economist,
   in an excellent article in May, gave the example of a Ukrainian case,
   where a small Ukrainian newspaper, which had only a handful of subscribers
   in this country-perhaps only a double-digit number of subscribers in this
   country-was sued in this country by a very wealthy Ukrainian. The article
   continued:

     "Even more striking was a second victory won"-

   that is, won by the gentleman concerned-

     "against...an internet news site that does not even publish in English."

   That is a sign that things are indeed going too far.

   There is also the question of the scope of Reynolds. I agree with the hon.
   Member for Surrey Heath (Michael Gove) who said that it was important that
   the Reynolds tests must be seen as a whole and not as individual hurdles.
   In particular, we should be encouraged by the fact that the Jameel case
   made that clear in the House of Lords. I hope that the development of that
   case law will be helpful. I am sceptical as to whether or not it provides
   a permanent solution, because although that

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 87WH

   case law is developing we still have the problem of people coming to sue
   here. Maybe the Rome II provisions emanating from the European Union will
   give protection to internet service providers, but I think that the
   Government have a task to reassure not just newspapers but bloggers and
   other individuals in this country that they are appraised of the problem
   and that they will either give Parliament an opportunity to debate this
   issue and even legislate on it or have some sort of review to deal with
   this problem, further than the Culture, Media and Sport Committee inquiry
   that has just been announced.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 87WH-continued

      10.40 am

   Mr. Edward Garnier (Harborough) (Con): Before I declare a number of
   interests, let me deal with the Rome II point that the hon. Member for
   Oxford, West and Abingdon (Dr. Harris) made. That deals with the choice of
   law, rather than the venue or forum. The Brussels regulation that is now
   being called the judgment regulation is what we need to concentrate on, as
   it provides a claimant with the right to sue the defendant in the
   defendant's jurisdiction. Under the regulation, if the BBC broadcasts
   something defamatory of someone in Jeddah, to pick a place at random, that
   citizen from Saudi Arabia is entitled to bring an action within that
   jurisdiction even if he has no other connection with it. The regulation
   modifies, to some extent, the forum non conveniens common-law argument
   that the right hon. Member for Rotherham (Mr. MacShane) mentioned.

   Dr. Harris: I accept what the hon. and learned Gentleman says, but my
   understanding of the Rome II proposal is that the legislation would be
   specific to where the damage was done. That might be important, because if
   the damage was done in a country other than the UK, it would mean that
   even if the UK courts were entitled to hear the case, they would have to
   do so in reference to the law of that land.

   Mr. Garnier: That is right, but the problem that we face with Rome II-I do
   not want to get diverted down this line, but it is partly my fault for
   mentioning this subject-is that the media cannot agree on its application.
   If they could get their house in order internationally, perhaps we could
   make some progress.

   As has been mentioned, Mr. Cook, I am a member of the defamation bar, and
   I have earned my living and paid my mortgage thanks to claimants and media
   organisations, some of which are represented by right hon. and hon.
   Members in the Chamber. I have made no value judgments between the rights
   and attractiveness of my clients, be they defendants or claimants. I have
   simply given such advice as I was capable of giving. I have won and lost
   cases, and I have had satisfied and deeply dissatisfied clients in my 35
   years at the bar. I am also a recorder, so I presume that I shall be
   protected by "Erskine May" if people start hurling abuse at me.

   This is too big a subject to deal with in eight minutes, but I want to
   draw out some threads of the right hon. Member for Rotherham's speech that
   were replicated by my hon. Friend the Member for Surrey Heath (Michael
   Gove) and the absent hon. Member for North Norfolk (Norman Lamb). The
   right hon. Gentleman might have

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 88WH

   assisted us by declaring that beyond being a member of the National Union
   of Journalists and a former officer of it, he was also a paid contributor
   to a number of newspapers. That fact is set out in the register of
   interests, but it is appropriate that hon. Members present should not miss
   out on it.

   The right hon. Gentleman drew out certain themes perfectly fairly, but
   some of his arguments were spoiled by a slightly waspish personal attack
   on individual solicitors firms and, by implication, on Mr. Justice Eady,
   whom, I am happy to say, the hon. Member for Oxford, West and Abingdon
   defended. He is a friend of mine-we used to share a room in chambers-and
   an extremely bright, careful and sensitive man. It is a pity, when he does
   no more than apply the law, that he is subjected to personal attacks in
   this Chamber and elsewhere. Judges cannot answer back, and I hope that
   when we discuss issues to do with the application and implementation of
   the law, we can leave aside personalities and deal with the relevant
   principles.

   The principles that the right hon. Gentleman discussed, about libel
   tourism and the extension into statute of the Reynolds defence, are
   perfectly reasonable arguments to have. These decisions ought to be made
   by Parliament, because once the courts reach a certain stage, they cannot
   develop the law further, and it is up to us, in Parliament, to do that. If
   the United States Congress or the other US state legislatures that he
   mentioned wish to limit the ambit of their jurisdiction, or to extend it,
   that is up to them, but, as my hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, South
   (Richard Ottaway) said, a US law does not impinge on the jurisdiction of
   the English courts. If a judge issues an order that a book should be
   pulped, although I have never heard of such an order, it would apply only
   to the books that happened to be within that court's jurisdiction. I do
   not think that we are going to see British judges ordering the pulping of
   books in California or New York. I would certainly be surprised if that
   happened.

   It is fair to point out that there has been a rash of foreigners coming to
   our country and making use of our libel laws regarding quite small
   publications-for example, if three, four, five or six issues of a foreign
   newspaper were published here. In order to do that, however, they had to
   demonstrate some connection with this jurisdiction, otherwise the common
   law would not have permitted them to do so. The decisions that permitted
   them to sue in this country in relation to small numbers of publications
   were always appealable, but in many cases they were not appealed. Indeed,
   Mr. Justice Eady's decision in the Ehrenfeld case that has been mentioned
   was a default judgment, which means that the defendant, Ehrenfeld, did not
   appear, through either lawyer or letter, to raise any objection to the
   jurisdictional point or any other. The damages that were awarded in that
   case were within the summary limits, and there was no fine.

   I do not intend to repeat the libels in any of the cases that have been
   mentioned. Neither do I think it appropriate to defame firms of lawyers-I
   confess that I have been instructed by both of the firms who have been
   defamed this morning-who are doing no more than their trade, which is to
   advise clients on the law of England and to enable them to gain access to
   the courts.

   Mr. MacShane: Will the hon. and learned Gentleman give way?

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 89WH

   Mr. Garnier: Will the right hon. Gentleman excuse me, because I have got
   to-

   Mr. MacShane: He has just accused me of defaming somebody. That is a
   serious accusation.

   Frank Cook (in the Chair): Order.

   Mr. MacShane: On a point of order, Mr. Cook. Is it in order for an hon.
   Member to accuse another right hon. Member of defamation?

   Frank Cook (in the Chair): On that point of order, I heard no explicit
   accusation of defamation.

   Mr. Garnier: If the right hon. Gentleman is upset about something, perhaps
   we could discuss it outside-then we can get on with the debate in here.

   Some serious points have been made about internet libel. There have been
   calls from the judiciary and from practitioners for an international
   instrument to deal with it. If the current British Government or any
   future one, encouraged by Parliament, wished to enter any such
   international agreement, we could get on with negotiating it, but we
   should not complain when judges apply the law as it stands.

   On the Reynolds defence, yes, it was an advance on what previously
   existed, but the House of Lords did not go as far as the New York
   jurisdiction and other US jurisdictions on public interest defences. If we
   want to do something about that, we should do so, rather than whingeing
   about it. We could do something in Parliament, perhaps by persuading the
   Government to introduce a law. It is strange that we have within our
   power, allegedly, the ability to influence Government, but that all we do
   instead is be rude-if I may use that expression-about lawyers who are
   applying the current law and about judges who are implementing it. If we
   are big enough and grown-up enough to praise, as we rightly do, the
   freedom of the press and the ability of journalists properly to
   investigate those who need investigation and to expose their inequities,
   we should also be big enough to admit that it is our fault if we do
   nothing.

   Over the years, we have had any number of inquiries, Government and
   otherwise, into the state of privacy laws and the relationship between the
   citizen and the fourth estate, but we have done nothing about it, because
   we lack the bravery and the political will to influence the press through
   legislation. We should either do it and get on with it, or stop whingeing
   and allow the judges and lawyers to do the job that they are perfectly
   lawfully entitled to do.

   I was prevented in 1995 from sitting on the Committee that scrutinised the
   Defamation Bill, later the Defamation Act 1996, on the basis that I would
   talk too much and because I knew too-well, too little, actually. That is
   what the deputy Chief Whip told me at the time. I have learned a lot in
   the past 35 years about human nature, the desire of newspapers to do their
   job and the harm that is inflicted on individuals when the newspapers
   sometimes get it wrong. There is a balance to be found, and it is up to us
   as parliamentarians to engineer such a balance.

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 90WH

      10.50 am

   The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Justice (Bridget Prentice):
   Thank you, Mr. Cook, for your wise advice at the beginning of the debate.
   I might as well begin by declaring an interest: I am not a lawyer, I am
   not a journalist and I am not dealing with any libel procedure in the
   courts at the moment-thank heavens. I hope that during the course of
   today's debate, I do not end up in that position either.

   First, I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Member for Rotherham (Mr.
   MacShane) on securing the debate and on jetting in from the United States
   to open it today. It is, as the hon. and learned Member for Harborough
   (Mr. Garnier) said, a very complicated, complex and important topic.
   Clearly, from this morning's contributions, it is one on which very strong
   views are held, and I shall very much take on board some of the ideas that
   people have put forward. However, I must emphasise that this Government
   firmly support the right to freedom of expression and its protections
   under article 10 of the European convention on human rights. Freedom of
   expression and a press that is free from state intervention are a
   fundamental part of our democracy and our way of life in the United
   Kingdom, so the hon. and learned Gentleman, who talked about getting the
   right balance, is absolutely correct: there is always the need to ensure
   that we have a balanced response.

   We believe that we have demonstrated our commitment to freedom of
   expression by including specific provisions in section 12 of the Human
   Rights Act 1998, requiring the courts to have particular regard to the
   convention's right on freedom of expression when deciding any case brought
   under the Act which might affect that right. But, of course, article 10
   rights are not absolute. The exercise of the right carries with it duties
   and responsibilities, and it may therefore be subject to restrictions
   provided by law-for example, the interests of public safety, the
   prevention of crime, or, the protection of the reputations or rights of
   others, which is particularly relevant to today's debate.

   In that context, it is important that people have an effective right to
   redress through the civil law when their reputation has been damaged as a
   result of the publication of defamatory material. The determination of
   individual cases is a matter for the courts, and, in each case that
   arises, the courts must strike an appropriate balance between the
   competing interests of the parties based on the circumstances of the case.
   It is important to emphasise that point, because, during today's debate,
   there have been occasions when it may have been lost in the heat of the
   argument.

   In the short time that I have, I shall respond to some of the issues that
   Members have raised. The hon. Member for North Norfolk (Norman Lamb)
   talked about investigative journalism and its importance, and, were he
   still here, I would tell him that, for example, my Department only
   yesterday announced plans to increase the media's right to report family
   proceedings cases. The Government are showing that they are committed to
   the openness and transparency that people want.

   I regularly read with great pleasure in The Times the articles by the hon.
   Member for Surrey Heath (Michael Gove). They are well written and full of
   enjoyment, at least from my perspective when reading them, and I shall
   take on board his questions about the Reynolds

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 91WH

   defence. If, after consideration, there is a suitable piece of legislation
   and we feel that the defence needs to be put in statute, and I am not
   saying that we do, I shall certainly look at the issue again.

   The civil law on defamation currently provides a range of defences. The
   hon. Member for Oxford, West and Abingdon (Dr. Harris) was concerned about
   whether there were sufficient defences, but there are a range of defences:
   justification, whereby the material is true; fair comment-whether the
   statements are matters of public interest; absolute privilege, which
   guarantees immunity from liability in situations such as parliamentary and
   court proceedings; and qualified privilege.In the case of secondary
   publishers, the defendant would not be liable where he or she is not the
   author, editor or publisher of the statement complained of; had taken
   reasonable care in relation to its publication; and did not know, and had
   no reason to believe, that what he or she did caused or contributed to the
   publication of a defamatory statement.

   In addition, section 2 of the 1996 Act provides a procedure by which a
   defendant can make an offer of amends to enable a valid claim to be
   settled cheaply and quickly without the need for court proceedings. The
   hon. Member for-

   Bob Spink: Castle Point-

   Bridget Prentice: The hon. Member for Castle Point (Bob Spink) referred to
   that. I beg his pardon.

   My right hon. Friend the Member for Rotherham expressed concern about
   several aspects of current law and procedure. He described "libel
   tourism", whereby someone with a tenuous connection to this country uses
   our courts to bring defamation proceedings. Let me explain in further
   detail-along the lines that the hon. and learned Member for Harborough
   took-how the jurisdiction of our courts works. If a court in this country
   is to hear a defamation case, it must have a ground of jurisdiction, and
   the rules on jurisdiction vary depending on whether the case is covered by
   European Community legislation. If it is, as the hon. and learned
   Gentleman said, the Brussels I regulation provides European-wide rules on
   jurisdiction in defamation matters. When Brussels I applies, particularly
   in cases whereby a defendant is domiciled in a member state, it will have
   precedence over national law, and English courts do not have a capacity to
   refuse jurisdiction or even to stay proceedings under Brussels I.

   Two particular provisions of the regulation are relevant to the debate.
   The first is article 2, which lays down a

   17 Dec 2008 : Column 92WH

   general rule that persons domiciled in a member state may be sued in that
   state. The second relevant provision is article 5(3), which provides an
   additional rule of jurisdiction for torts, on which the claimant can rely
   in place of article 2. Article 5(3) allows claimants to sue in the courts
   of the place where the harmful event occurred, leaving to the laws of the
   member states the definition of what constitutes a harmful event. Under
   English law, the harmful event is publication, which is defined as the
   communication that constitutes the defamation.

   I shall briefly turn to the question of the internet. We hope to publish a
   consultation as soon as possible.

   Mr. Garnier: If the Government are proposing to look at the issue of
   conditional fee agreements, as I think they are, will the Minister ensure
   that any changes to them permit equality of arms? There are some very rich
   newspaper organisations that use their financial might to prevent
   impoverished people from getting to court, but equally, if CFAs are being
   abused, there needs to be that balance-that equality of arms.

   Bridget Prentice: I take very seriously what the hon. and learned
   Gentleman says, and I agree. We will publish as soon as possible in the
   new year a consultation paper on defamation and the internet, and later,
   as part of the proposed consultation, we will also seek views on the
   abolition of criminal libel in respect of defamatory material. On the
   issue of conditional fee agreements, some important points have been made
   about opportunities for people with very little means, and we are
   therefore very keen to ensure that the current situation continues. We are
   also concerned about the disproportionate cost of defamation proceedings,
   we are considering whether additional measures might be necessary to
   control those costs, and we will consult on that shortly.

   My right hon. Friend the Member for Rotherham mentioned the possible use
   of small claims procedures. We have had a look at that idea, and we think
   that, because defamation can be complex, the small claims court may not be
   the most appropriate place for such procedures, so I am not convinced that
   that is the right way forward. However, we will look at whether civil law
   reform might be necessary, although I must say that I am not yet
   convinced. If it is, however, we will certainly look at the issue. Frank
   Cook (in the Chair): Order. We must respond to the constraints of time and
   move on. [Interruption.] Will Members please conduct their conversations
   outside the Chamber?

