From: Karl Rouse
Sent: Sat 1/12/2008 10:05
To: BATP Performance Arts Yr 3
Cc: Jessica Bowles; Amber massie-blomfield (Alum); Simon Donger; Astles Cariad
Subject: National Student Survey and third year update


A really important message about the National Student Survey, please
read in full and let me know if you have questions.

Very shortly you will be contacted to complete the National Student
Survey, this is a really important activity for the school.  The results
of the survey are used more and more by potential applicants as a way
of judging which school they wish to apply to, and internationally it
have a huge implication for our profile.

Therefore a full showing of students from the programme to complete the
survey is important to ensure everyone's opinion is taken into account.
For example, often what can happen is only those who want to complain
about something complete such surveys and this means that the results
don't give an accurate picture of what life can be like in the school.
When this happens it is bad for our profile, and therefore ultimately
your profile, but it also means we start to make changes to the course
based upon what can be inaccurate feedback which doesn't represent the
whole group and their experience.

I'll be talking about the survey in a seminar this term, and hope you'll
all come to hear about it, and I really hope that when asked you'll all
take the time to complete it accurately and in some detail so that we
know how successful your time with us has been from your perspective.
This is important so that the best practice can be celebrated, and the
weaker areas may be improved.

When completing the survey please take time to really understand each
question and realise the relationship of that question to your time at
CSSD (i.e. every course completes the same questionnaire, from science
courses, to politics degrees, to performance arts, all students are
asked the same questions and so you need to spend some time applying each
question to your context to ensure the most accurate answers can be given)
it only takes a short time and means so much to us at the school.

It is also important to remember that we have outlets in school to let
us know where problems are, such as seminars, tutorials, course committee
(Joe Conner has been doing a great job on this for a few years now!) and
they should be the times when we hear about concerns and problems so that
we can deal with them for you while your a student with us, the survey
shouldn't be the time to bring things up for the first time or to complain
after the fact, I'd like to hear from you now (and have wanted to hear for
the past three years) about how we can help you be the best you can be.

Finally, really think about your answers.  In the recent 'mock' survey
that we did (last term you completed a paper copy for me as you will
remember) a number of people when asked 'is feedback prompt' said 'no',
yet at your last assessment in year two, feedback and grading were given
the same day that you were assessed (remember the viva's with me and
Henry?), receiving feedback on the same day is as prompt as it could
have been, yet the results of your survey based upon the results of
the Autumn would tell future students that the time for giving feedback
is poor.  The same could be said of 'do you have access to your tutor',
a number of people said 'no', yet on average my e-mails are all answered
if full within five hours, and requests for tutorials are met within
three days maximum (on average).  I mention these two examples as the
results of the survey do contradict with the experience offered and can
paint an incorrect picture, so please really think about each question
and interrogate it before answering.

More information can be found at http://www.thestudentsurvey.com
<http://www.thestudentsurvey.com/>  and we'll talk about this very soon.

So for now you don't need to do anything but be aware of this and if
you want to research the website above, I'll talk about this again in
a seminar very soon and you'll be given more information soon.

Finally, please be prompt for your meetings with Henry on Monday to
collect your feedback from last term, remember Henry is representation
the entire assessment team and may not be able to answer all of your
questions as he hasn't marked all of the folders himself.  To keep the
schedule as smooth as we can please arrive early (to the Hampstead) and
remember to protect everyone's privacy please only approach when Henry
becomes free.  There is a seminar with Amber on Friday and that would be
a good time to ask any questions arising from the Autumn term feedback
and to explore successful (or not) strategies with the rest of the group.

Very best wishes

P.S. Congratulations to everyone in Liverpool, the programme was really
well represented by the team who are up there!
 
Karl Rouse BFSA, FRSA
Pathway Leader for Performance Arts 
Senior Lecturer in Alternative Theatre and New Performance Practice
The Central School of Speech and Drama 
The University of London 
http://www.cssd.ac.uk <http://www.cssd.ac.uk/>  
k.rouse@cssd.ac.uk <mailto:k.rouse@cssd.ac.uk>  
 
Applications for the Accidental Festival 2008 open soon
http://www.accidentalfestival.com <http://www.accidentalfestival.com/> 
 
Notice of Confidentiality.
This e-mail and its attachment(s) are intended for the named addressee(s)
only.  It contains information which may be confidential.  Unless you
are the named addressee (or authorised to receive it for the addressee)
you may not read, copy, distribute copies or take action on it (except
to contact the sender), or disclose its contents or any part of its
content to anyone else.  If you have reason to believe that you are not
the intended recipient of this communication, please contact the sender
immediately and delete this email from your system.  We have taken steps
to ensure it is free from viruses and neither The Central School of Speech
and Drama nor the sender accepts any responsibility for any viruses
and it is your responsibility to scan the email and its attachments.
The content of this email is that of the author and does not necessarily
represent the views of Central.  Central accepts no liability for the
content of this email, or for the consequences of any actions taken on
the basis of the information provided.  Central shall not enter into any
legally binding arrangement with a recipient by email. Please note that
in order to investigate unauthorised use and compliance with internal
policies, incoming and outgoing communications may be intercepted and
monitored by Central.
