Subject: FW: Supporting our Agenda in Washington 


From: Office of John W. Thompson 
Sent: Wednesday, June 25, 2008 12:14 PM
To: DL-SYMC-PAC
Subject: Supporting our Agenda in Washington 

 

Dear Colleague,

 

Symantec employees are active and engaged in our communities. Whether
it's charitable activities or political engagement, Symantec employees
are informed and involved in the decisions that affect our company.
Supporting candidates for elected office at the state and federal level
who understand our company's legislative initiatives and policies
is appropriate and in the interest of our customers, employees, and
stockholders.



Symantec sponsors a Political Action Committee (PAC) called SYMPAC,
which allows employees to voluntarily pool their resources to support
candidates for public office. The PAC contributes money to candidates
for federal and state office and political parties and committees. I hope
you will join me and many of your colleagues in supporting the Symantec
PAC today, so that we can ensure that your political voice is heard.



Symantec and SYMPAC's political spending reflects company, employee,
and shareholder interests and not those of its individual officers
or directors. A PAC Executive Committee governs and oversees all PAC
activities. When making political disbursements from SYMPAC, a number
of criteria are considered: the candidate's demonstrated leadership
or potential for leadership; the candidate's position on issues
affecting information integrity; and related high technology public
policy priorities such as research funding and tax credits, green IT,
and ensuring access to markets. Our objective is to continue to grow
SYMPAC, both in terms of the number of Symantec employees participating
and the total dollars raised, so that we can better engage in the
political process.



The 2008 general election is rapidly approaching, and this presents
a significant opportunity for Symantec to be politically engaged and
support candidates for elected office who have demonstrated to be
strong advocates for our issues and the software industry. Government
decisions have a significant and growing impact on our business and
we must actively participate in supporting those political candidates
who share our views on important public policy issues. We still lag
far behind many other technology industry PACs.  We are now competing
with companies that have spent many years participating in the policy
and political debate in Washington, so your support is needed now more
than ever. Our ability to contribute to candidates is an important way
to help elect individuals that understand and support our views, but we
can't do that without sufficient funding of the PAC.



Today, I'm inviting you to join SYMPAC, a key tool in electing effective
representatives to serve in Washington. Our goal is to raise $125,000 for
the 2008 election cycle and we are currently halfway there. A number
of Symantec employees already participate in Symantec PAC, and we
appreciate their support. I hope that you will consider donating what
you can to ensure that PAC is adequately funded. Remember, this is a
strictly voluntary program which is administered by a committee with
regular feedback to participants on how PAC funds were spent.



You can contribute by check or through payroll deduction. For example, a
$500 contribution is just over twenty dollars a pay period per year. Your
contributions are completely voluntary, and any amount of support is
helpful. Please contact Adam Rak or Tiffany Jones in Government Relations
to learn how you can sign up and contribute to the PAC, or if you have
any additional questions regarding eligibility or contribution limits.



In closing let me stress again that our collective commitment is vital to
the success of Symantec and of Symantec's PAC. Together, we can ensure
that Symantec's voice is heard loud and clear in Washington, DC and our
state capitals.



Thank you for your consideration and efforts in support of our company
and the Symantec PAC.



Sincerely,



John W. Thompson

Chairman and CEO





Contributions or gifts to the Symantec Corporation PAC are not deductible
as charitable contributions for federal income tax purposes.



Contributions to SYMPAC may not exceed $5,000 per year.  Contributions are
strictly voluntary and will not affect your relationship with Symantec
Corporation in any way.  Symantec Corporation PAC contributions will be
used for political purposes to support candidates for federal office
and state office in key states where corporate contributions are not
permitted.  Any guidelines for a suggested contribution are voluntary,
and merely suggestions.  You are free to contribute more or less than the
guidelines suggest and Symantec Corporation will not favor or disadvantage
anyone by reason of the amount of their contributions, or their decision
not to contribute.  Foreign nationals may not contribute to SYMPAC.



Federal Law requires political committees to use their best efforts to
obtain and report to the Federal Election Commission the name, mailing
address, occupation, and name of employer for each individual whose
contributions aggregate in excess of $200 per year.
