Date: Wed, 19 Jan 2005 02:07:51 +0100
From: Veit Kuehne
To: veit
Subject: HC democracy and strategy

Hi friends,
ah, how much fun to read all those long messages. This is a discussion
that will come again and again, as long as the club will exist, and it
is fun. I will try to share some comments on some of your points
(impossible to say something about everything - I invite you to
Dresden to discuss more and in detail over a beer if you wish!). Most
of you have already perfectly expressed my own thoughts, so don't have
to repeat them (thanks a lot!! - I will save and recycle those texts
when the discussion comes up again in the future). Luckily I can
recycle a text from myself I wrote for Jean-Yves some time back, here
you go:

> " Put online something not approve by Veit, you or some commitee (I
> know Veit does'nt like this word but with 11000 members, may be we
> will soon need more structure)"

It is not the word. I really mean it. There will never be any
"commitee" for taking decisions, as long as I am onboard in the club
and am involved in it. And since I am quite young, it might take 50
years...:-)

Seriously, since the beginning this is one of my most important dogmas
for the HC: no official structure for decision taking. I will always
discuss issues openly with the people involved and with knowledge to
come to good decisions that are the best for the network. But the
final decision will always be with me.

I know this sounds harsh, especially when coming from a "democratic"
network like Servas. But I see it as the only way to keep power
struggles, manipulation, inefficiency out of the club. Who will chose
any commitee? How to make sure they really think about the best for
the club? How to avoid struggles between them? I don't want to waste
any time and energy with that. The club from this angle really just is
an internet platform to bring people together and we don't need any
commitee to take decisions. No matter whether there are 1000, 11.000
or 1.000.000 members. The benefit is that we can take quick decisions
and don't waste energy in power struggles. As long as I don't go crazy
or stop listening to people's opinion, this decision making process
will work.

If you only meant that we need more structure in asense of organizing
the work - I absolutely agree. I am more and more getting used to the
role of organizing the specialized teams of volunteers who take care
of HC issues independently. And of course I will not be involved in
every decision there - so the above only holds true for "debatable"
decisions. As more people become active, I can give up more control -
just the way it should be. For example, I really trust Claudio in all
those speed improvements and don't have the check or be involved in
any way. Thank god! :-) >>

Adding a few things to that: to understand my stand point you have to
realize that I founded the HC exactly as an alternative to Servas -
which in my eyes is hindered so much by it's pseudo-democratic setup.
So I vowed since the beginning that the HC will never go down this
road to inefficiency. If you want a democratic hospitality exchange
network, become a Servas member, try to get your ideas into reality
there. I promise you that it will be easier in the HC - because we try
to implement good sound ideas as quickly as possible. All this
democracy talk sounds so strict and harsh. It is important to realize
that I am HAPPY to give up responsability. For message checking. For
accepting members. For translations. etc. etc.

That's the plan - get more and more great volunteers onboard and hand
them over some part of our network. But I will not give up
responsability for the HC as a whole for many decades to come
(hopefully), that's why I am reserving the final word in any really
important or debated decisions for myself.

As Tijs wrote: "...a not-for-profit organisation does not need to be
democratic, to be able to integrate new members and motivate more
people to involve."

That's the real challenge. How to get people to contribute, and here I
always listen to all of you guys. I know sometimes I am overburdened,
sometimes I make mistakes or let people wait too long. But I KNOW that
this is not perfect and I am really striving to get better and better
at it. I KNOW that the survival of the HC depends on our ability to
motivate people to contribute. And you can trust me that I am smart
enough to work on myself and my work routines where I see it is really
needed. And integrating new volunteers in a good way really was a big
problem in the last months. We are working on it.

Another note: we already did one very successful semi-democratic
feedback/decision thing: when implementing the new navigation on top
we announced it in the News, presented several alternatives and asked
for opinions. After that I took those opinions, weighed and counted
them - and finally took the seemingly most popular. And that's what I
always try to do: involve many people, listen to many opinions and
then come to good decisions. It seems to be working. Also, I always
try to listen to "normal" members, to look over their shoulder when
they use the club, to read all feedback messages, so I never make the
mistake to just take the opinion of you valued key volunteers ;-) And
this, btw also solves the issue of "key volunteers" vs. "normal
members" - all opinions are listened to. Maybe the key volunteers have
more weight, but only because I know and see they also care a lot
about our network, and WORK a lot on it to make it better and better.

About Tijs' suggestion to present better why we are doing things, what
we will do in the future: the problem with that is that it often
depends on programming, that it is quite unpredictable at times. But I
agree that we need to find ways to integrate new or future volunteers
better, and this will be done in the Volunteers Group once a way to
send messages to all members of a group has been programmed. Just a
bit of patience - our communcation will improve. There was some talk
about my MindMap. It basically is just a way for me to keep my
thoughts and to do lists organized, and of course I cannot put it
online. But many parts of it are online anyway - the Detailed
Volunteer Info page is pretty much straight from my MindMap. Gerrit is
also working with a MindMap that used to be mine ;-) So please trust
me to efficiently manage my thoughts with that tool and to put those
things onto the site that should be there.

Coordinators: I will write some more about this job in other messages.
Thanks for the list, Pierre ;-)

Yahoogroup: Augustas, we had a YG before for key volunteers. Problem
with it: there are so many issues that have to be discussed among
always-changing volunteers (sometimes Pierre has to tell Gerrit, Valmi
and me something, something Kjell me and Gerrit etc etc) that it
really has proven more effective to use CC: Otherwise the email volume
would rise and rise and we would spend all our days just reading HC
mails and not actually working anymore.

Last but not least, let me close with a little anecdote: when I was
18, I decided to run for city council in the town of Herzberg. I went
4 weeks every day from door to door listening to people's suggestions
what should be done better in town and introducing myself. I filled a
whole little book with suggestions and at the end I knew what the
people in town REALLY wanted. Then, I was elected but being from a
small party was the only one in city council so couldnt really make
those suggestions a reality. NOW I have the HC and I CAN make many
suggestions come true. So you dont have to fear for a moment that I
will become stuck-up or arrogant in that sense - I will always listen
and try to make people happy. That's what I love doing!

Allright - although we have spent many valuable volunteer-hours on
this discussion, it was probably good to have it. As I said, I will
save some texts and use them again in the future. Feel free to discuss
more and send me more thoughts, but I think it is better to continue
this in real life. Now I will try to concentrate on getting all those
1680 messages in my Inbox answered so you have less reason to complain
and many future volunteers see that we indeed care about them. You can
help me by accepting the HC the way it is, taking a piece of it and
working on it, trying to make it better. Thanks to those of you who
have done so for months and years in the past!

Greetings from the wonderful city of Dresden, Germany,
Veit

P.S.: I went through and entered all of you that had been included
before via BCC: I think it is not good to send out such messages via a
large CC: list - whenever one of us gets a virus, all others will be
virusbombed.

-- Please visit my projects and help me:

   * http://www.hospitalityclub.org - free accommodation world wide
through hospitality exchange

http://secure.hospitalityclub.org/hc/travel.php?cid=veit - my profile

   * http://www.bringing-people-together.net - 1,000,000 friendly
people for the Hospitality Club
   * http://www.peacebus.org - to Iraq with my brothers, bringing
children money+paintings, selling peace flags
   * http://www.AFSer.org - AFS Online Volunteers, support for
exchange students using the net
   * http://www.trampen.net - die deutschen Tramper im Netz! German
hitchhikers on the net
   * http://www.veit.net - personal homepage with lots of info about
hitchhiking, travels, Mark Twain
   * email to veit-subscribe@yahoogroups.com to receive news from me
every now and then

ICQ:xxxxxxxx MSN:veitxxxx@hotmail.com Yahoo:veitxx AOL:veitxx send SMS
to my mobile phone from the net: +49(0)xxx xxxx xxx. Fix phone:
+49(0)xxx xxx xxxxx

Visit me in Dresden, Germany!! See you in the real world!!!

www.hospitalityclub.org - www.peacebus.org - www.AFSer.org -
www.trampen.net - www.veit.net
